[shelly] Plus 1/1PM Add-On support; fix roller pos on open/close state (#13520)
openhab/openhab-addons: bundles/org.openhab.binding.shelly/README.md

| Parameter      |Description                                                         |Mandatory|Default                                         |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------|
| defaultUserId  |Default user id for HTTP authentication when not set in the Thing   |    no   |admin                                           |
| defaultPassword|Default password for HTTP authentication when not set in the Thing  |    no   |admin                                           |
| autoCoIoT      |Auto-enable CoIoT events when firmware 1.6+ is enabled (Gen1 only). |    no   |true                                            |

`defaultUserId` and `defaultPassword:` will be used by the binding if device protection is enabled. However, the Plus/Pro devices have a fixed user id àdmin`. Nevertheless the binding provide that option to allow a mixed operation of Gen 1 and 2 devices in the same installation having same defaults.

`Generation 1`: The binding defaults to CoIoT events when firmware 1.6 or newer is detected. CoIoT provides near-realtime updates on device status changes.

> This mode also overrules event settings in the Thing configuration. Disabling this feature allows granular control, which event types will be used. This is also required when the Shelly devices are not located on the same IP subnet (e.g. using a VPN). In this case autoCoIoT should be disabled, CoIoT events will not work, because the underlying CoAP protocol is based on Multicast IP, which usually doesn't passes a VPN or routed network.

Reviewer: If you put each sentence in a separate line, reading the diffs would be easier. Please check all new additions.

Author: changed

The binding has the following configuration options:

### Generation 1

| Parameter      |Description                                                         |Mandatory|Default                                         |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------|
| defaultUserId  |Default user id for HTTP authentication when not set in the Thing   |    no   |admin                                           |
| defaultPassword|Default password for HTTP authentication when not set in the Thing  |    no   |admin                                           |
| autoCoIoT      |Auto-enable CoIoT events when firmware 1.6+ is enabled (Gen1 only). |    no   |true                                            |

> `defaultUserId` and `defaultPassword:` will be used by the binding if device protection is enabled. However, the Plus/Pro devices have a fixed user id àdmin`. Nevertheless the binding provide that option to allow a mixed operation of Gen 1 and 2 devices in the same installation having same defaults.

Reviewer: There's a backtick on the a. These sentences could also be on separate lines.

Author: fixed

Author: fixed

The period is computed depending on the device type and configuration:

- battery  powered devices: &lt;sleepPeriod from device config&gt; + 10min, usually 12h+10min=730min

> - else, if CoIoT or WevSocket is enabled: 3*&lt;update Period from device settings&gt;+10sec, usually3*15+10=45sec

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- else, if CoIoT or WebSocket is enabled: 3*&lt;update Period from device settings&gt;+10sec, usually3*15+10=45sec
```

Enable the autoCoIoT option in the binding configuration or eventsCoIoT in the Thing configuration to activate CoIoT.

### Generation 2: WebSockets

> The Plus and Pro series of devices use WebSockets for device communication. Usually the binding establishes a WebSocket connection to the device (http port 88). However, battery powered devices like the Plus HT are not reachable while the device is in sleep mode. For those the binding sets up a so called "Outbound WebSocket" during device initialization. Afterwards the device wakes up and calls the configured URL, which is the processed by the binding. The device UI shows the URL when active. Battery powered devices could only report events to a single host, take care if you have multiple openHAB instances on the same network.

Reviewer: Can you make these separate lines, too?

Author: fixed

|          |input        |Switch   |yes      |ON: Input/Button is powered, see General Notes on Channels                       |
|          |button       |Trigger  |yes      |Event trigger, see section Button Events                                         |
|meter     |currentWatts |Number   |yes      |Current power consumption in Watts                                               |
|          |lastPower1   |Number   |yes      |Energy consumption for a round minute, 1 minute  ago                             |

> |          |totalKWH     |Number   |yes      |Total energy consumption in kw/h since the device powered up (resets on restart) |

Reviewer: Please check all.
```suggestion
|          |totalKWH     |Number   |yes      |Total energy consumption in kWh since the device powered up (resets on restart) |
```

Author: fixed

|          |totalKWH     |Number   |yes      |Total energy consumption in Watts since the device powered up (resets on restart)|
|          |lastUpdate   |DateTime |yes      |Timestamp of the last measurement                                                |

### Shelly 2 - roller mode thing-type: shelly2-roller)

|Group     |Channel      |Type     |read-only|Description                                                                           |
|----------|-------------|---------|---------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|roller    |control      |Rollershutter|r/w  |can be open (0%), stop, or close (100%); could also handle ON (open) and OFF (close)  |
|          |input        |Switch   |yes      |ON: Input/Button is powered, see General Notes on Channels                            |
|          |event        |Trigger  |yes      |Roller event/trigger with payload ROLLER_OPEN / ROLLER_CLOSE / ROLLER_STOP            |

> |          |rollerpos    |Number   |r/w      |Roller position: 100%=open...0%=closed; gets updated when the roller stops, see Notes |

Reviewer: Is there any reason introducing a second channel representing the position in percent? Rollershutter can also be fed and controlled with PercentType.

Author: this has a long story, some of the UI integration require 0..100% vs. 100..0%, The rollershutter's one is default and the rollerpos is marked as an advanced channel.

|          |rollerFav    |Number   |r/w      |Select roller position favorite (1-4, 0=no), see Notes                                |
|          |state        |String   |yes      |Roller state: open/close/stop                                                         |
|          |stopReason   |String   |yes      |Last stop reasons: normal, safety_switch or obstacle                                  |
|          |safety       |Switch   |yes      |Indicates status of the Safety Switch, ON=problem detected, powered off               |
|meter     |currentWatts |Number   |yes      |Current power consumption in Watts                                                    |
|          |lastPower1   |Number   |yes      |Accumulated energy consumption in Watts for the full last minute                      |
|          |totalKWH     |Number   |yes      |Total energy consumption in Watts since the device powered up (reset on restart)      |
|          |lastUpdate   |DateTime |yes      |Timestamp of the last measurement                                                     |

> `Note: The Roller should be calibrated using the device Web UI or Shelly App, otherwise the position can .`

Reviewer: Is there a word missing?

Author: fixed

|          |rollerFav    |Number   |r/w      |Select roller position favorite (1-4, 0=no), see Notes                                |
|          |state        |String   |yes      |Roller state: open/close/stop                                                         |
|          |stopReason   |String   |yes      |Last stop reasons: normal, safety_switch or obstacle                                  |
|          |safety       |Switch   |yes      |Indicates status of the Safety Switch, ON=problem detected, powered off               |
|meter     |currentWatts |Number   |yes      |Current power consumption in Watts                                                    |
|          |lastPower1   |Number   |yes      |Accumulated energy consumption in Watts for the full last minute                      |
|          |totalKWH     |Number   |yes      |Total energy consumption in kw/h since the device powered up (reset on restart)      |
|          |lastUpdate   |DateTime |yes      |Timestamp of the last measurement                                                     |

> `Note: The Roller should be calibrated using the device Web UI or Shelly App, otherwise the position can't be set.`

Reviewer: To put emphasis on this note you can sourround it with "*" instead of using fixed-width font, which is more for code.

Author: fixed
